
PROLOGUE
﻿#ch 序章
"We should start back," Gared urged as the woods began to grow dark around them. "The wildlings are dead."
“既然野人（注解１）已经死了，”眼看周围的树林逐渐阴暗，盖瑞不禁催促道，“咱们回头吧。”
"Do the dead frighten you?" Ser Waymar Royce asked with just the hint of a smile.
“死人吓着你了么？”威玛•罗伊斯爵士带着轻浅的笑意问道。
Gared did not rise to the bait. He was an old man, past fifty, and he had seen the lordlings come and go. "Dead is dead," he said. "We have no business with the dead."
盖瑞并未中激将之计，年过五十的他算得上是个老人，这辈子看过太多的贵族子弟来来去去。“死了就是死了，”他说，“咱们没必要和死人打交道。”
"Are they dead?" Royce asked softly. "What proof have we?"
“你确定他们真的死了么？”罗伊斯轻声问，“证据何在？”
"Will saw them," Gared said. "If he says they are dead, that’s proof enough for me."
“威尔看到了，”盖瑞说，“我相信他说的话。”
Will had known they would drag him into the quarrel sooner or later. He wished it had been later rather than sooner. "My mother told me that dead men sing no songs," he put in.
威尔早料到他们早晚会把自己卷入这场争执，只是没想到这么快。“我妈说过，死人不会唱歌。”他插嘴。
"My wet nurse said the same thing, Will," Royce replied. "Never believe anything you hear at a woman’s tit. There are things to be learned even from the dead." His voice echoed, too loud in the twilit forest.
“威尔，我奶妈也说过这话，”罗伊斯回答，“千万别相信你在女人怀里听到的话。 人就算是死了，也能让我们学到很多东西。”他的余音在暮色昏暝的森林里回荡，似乎大声了点。
"We have a long ride before us," Gared pointed out. "Eight days, maybe nine. And night is falling."
“眼前路还长得很，”盖瑞指出，“少不了要走个八九天，况且现在天色渐渐暗了下来。”
Ser Waymar Royce glanced at the sky with disinterest. "It does that every day about this time. Are you unmanned by the dark, Gared?"
威长罗伊斯爵士意兴阑珊地扫视天际。“每天这时候不都这样？盖瑞，你该不会伯黑吧？”
Will could see the tightness around Gared’s mouth, the barely suppressed anger in his eyes under the thick black hood of his cloak. Gared had spent forty years in the Night’s Watch, man and boy, and he was not accustomed to being made light of. Yet it was more than that. Under the wounded pride, Will could sense something else in the older man. You could taste it; a nervous tension that came perilous close to fear.
威尔可以看见盖瑞紧抿的嘴唇，以及他厚重黑斗篷下强自遏抑的怒火。盖瑞当了四十年的守夜人（注解２），这种资历可不是随便给人寻开心的。但是盖瑞不只是愤怒，在他受伤的自尊底下，威尔隐约可以察觉到某种潜藏的不安，一种近似于畏惧的紧张情绪。
Will shared his unease. He had been four years on the Wall. The first time he had been sent beyond, all the old stories had come rushing back, and his bowels had turned to water. He had laughed about it afterward. He was a veteran of a hundred rangings by now, and the endless dark wilderness that the southron called the haunted forest had no more terrors for him.
威尔深有同感。他戍守绝境长城不过四年，当初首次越墙北进，所有的传说故事突然都涌上心头，把他吓得四肢发软，事后回想起难免觉得好笑。如今他是拥有百余次巡逻经验的老手，眼前这片南方人称作鬼影森林的无垠荒野，他早已无所畏惧。
Until tonight. Something was different tonight. There was an edge to this darkness that made his hackles rise. Nine days they had been riding, north and northwest and then north again, farther and farther from the Wall, hard on the track of a band of wildling raiders. Each day had been worse than the day that had come before it. Today was the worst of all. A cold wind was blowing out of the north, and it made the trees rustle like living things. All day, Will had felt as though something were watching him, something cold and implacable that loved him not. Gared had felt it too. Will wanted nothing so much as to ride hellbent for the safety of the Wall, but that was not a feeling to share with your commander.
然而今晚却是个例外。此夜回异于往昔，四面环暗中有种莫可名状，让他汗毛竖立的惊悚。他们轻骑北出长城，九天来昼夜不断推进，紧咬野人土匪的足迹。情况日益恶化，而今天已然降到谷底。阴森北风吹得树影幢幢，宛如狰狞活物，威尔整天都觉得自己受到一种冰冷且对他毫无好感的不知名东西监视，盖瑞也感觉到了，此刻威尔心中只想掉转马头，没命似地逃回长城。但这却是万万不能在长官面前说起的念头。
Especially not a commander like this one.
尤其是这样的长官。
Ser Waymar Royce was the youngest son of an ancient house with too many heirs. He was a handsome youth of eighteen, grey-eyed and graceful and slender as a knife. Mounted on his huge black destrier, the knight towered above Will and Gared on their smaller garrons. He wore black leather boots, black woolen pants, black moleskin gloves, and a fine supple coat of gleaming black ringmail over layers of black wool and boiled leather. Ser Waymar had been a Sworn Brother of the Night’s Watch for less than half a year, but no one could say he had not prepared for his vocation. At least insofar as his wardrobe was concerned.
威玛•罗伊斯爵士出身贵族世家，在儿孙满堂的家里排行老么。他是个俊美的十八岁青年，有双灰色眸子，举止优雅，瘦得像把尖刀。骑在他那匹健壮的黑色战马上，比骑着体型较小的犁马的威尔和盖瑞高出许多。他穿着黑色皮靴，黑色羊毛裤，黑色鼹鼠皮手套，黑色羊毛衫外头是硬皮甲，又罩了一件闪闪发光的黑色环甲。威玛爵士宣誓成为守夜人还不满半年，但他绝非毫无准备空手而来，最起码他的行头一件不少。
His cloak was his crowning glory; sable, thick and black and soft as sin. "Bet he killed them all himself, he did," Gared told the barracks over wine, "twisted their little heads off, our mighty warrior." They had all shared the laugh.
他身上最耀眼的行头，自然便是那件既厚实，又软得吓人的黑色貂皮斗篷。“我敢打赌，那一堆黑貂一定是他亲手杀的，”盖瑞在军营里喝酒时对战友说，“我们伟大的战士哦，把它们的小头一颗颗扭断啦。”当时可引得众人哄笑成一团。
It is hard to take orders from a man you laughed at in your cups, Will reflected as he sat shivering atop his garron. Gared must have felt the same.
假如你的长官是个大伙儿饮酒作乐时嘲笑的对象，你要怎么去尊敬他呢？威尔骑在马上，不禁如此想着。想必盖瑞也深有同感。
"Mormont said as we should track them, and we did," Gared said. "They’re dead. They shan’t trouble us no more. There’s hard riding before us. I don’t like this weather. If it snows, we could be a fortnight getting back, and snow’s the best we can hope for. Ever seen an ice storm, my lord?"
“莫尔蒙（注解３）叫我们追查野人行踪，我们也照办了，”盖瑞道，“现在他们死了，再也不会来骚扰我们。眼前还有好长一段路等着我们。我实在不喜欢这种天气，要是下起雪来，我们得花两个礼拜才能回去。下雪还算不上什么，大人，您可见过冰风暴肆虐的景象？”
The lordling seemed not to hear him. He studied the deepening twilight in that half-bored, half-distracted way he had. Will had ridden with the knight long enough to understand that it was best not to interrupt him when he looked like that. "Tell me again what you saw, Will. All the details. Leave nothing out."
小少爷似乎没听见这番话。他用他特有的那种兴致缺缺、漫不经心的方式审视着渐暗的暮色。威尔跟在他身边已经有一段时间，知道这种时候最好不要打断他。“威尔，再跟我说一辫你看到了些什么。”
Will had been a hunter before he joined the Night’s Watch. Well, a poacher in truth. Mallister freeriders had caught him red-handed in the Mallisters’ own woods, skinning one of the Mallisters’ own bucks, and it had been a choice of putting on the black or losing a hand. No one could move through the woods as silent as Will, and it had not taken the black brothers long to discover his talent.
在成为守夜人以前，威尔原本靠打猎维生。说得难听点，其实就是盗猎者。当年他在海利斯特家族的森林里偷猎公鹿，正忙着剥鹿皮，弄得一手血腥的时候，被受雇于梅利斯特家的流浪武士逮个正着。他若是不选择加入黑衫军，就只有双手被砍一途。威尔潜行的本事是一等一的，在森林里的无声潜行没人比得上，而黑衫军的弟兄们果然也很快就发现了他的长处。
"The camp is two miles farther on, over that ridge, hard beside a stream," Will said. "I got close as I dared. There’s eight of them, men and women both. No children I could see. They put up a lean-to against the rock. The snow’s pretty well covered it now, but I could still make it out. No fire burning, but the firepit was still plain as day. No one moving. I watched a long time. No living man ever lay so still."
“营地在两哩外，翻过山脊，紧邻着一条溪。”威尔答道，“我已经靠得很近了。总共有八个人，男女都有，但没看见小孩。他们背靠着大石头，雪几乎要把营地整个盖住，不过我还是分辨得出来。没有营火，但火堆的余烬还很明显。他们动也没动，我仔细看了好一会儿，活人绝不会躺得这么安静。”
"Did you see any blood?"
“你有发现血迹么？”
"Well, no," Will admitted.
“嗯，没有。”威尔坦承。
"Did you see any weapons?"
“你有看见任何武器么？”
"Some swords, a few bows. One man had an axe. Heavy-looking, double-bladed, a cruel piece of iron. It was on the ground beside him, right by his hand."
“几支剑、两三把弓，还有个家伙带了一柄斧头。铁打的双刃斧，看起来挺重的，就放在他右手边的地上。”
"Did you make note of the position of the bodies?"
“你有记下他们躺着的相对位置么？”
Will shrugged. "A couple are sitting up against the rock. Most of them on the ground. Fallen, like."
威尔耸耸肩。“两三个靠在石头上，大部分都躺在地上，像是被打死的。”
"Or sleeping," Royce suggested.
“也有可能是在睡觉。”罗伊斯提议。
"Fallen," Will insisted. "There’s one woman up an ironwood, half-hid in the branches. A far-eyes."
“肯定是被打死的，”威尔坚持己见，“因为有个女的躲在铁树林里，应该是斥候。
He smiled thinly. "I took care she never saw me. When I got closer, I saw that she wasn’t moving neither." Despite himself, he shivered.
他浅浅一笑。“我小心得很，没让她见着。但等到我靠近，却发现她也没反应。”说到这他不禁一阵颤抖。
"You have a chill?" Royce asked.
“你受寒了？”罗伊斯问。
"Some," Will muttered. "The wind, m’lord."
“有点吧，”威尔喃喃道，“大人，是这风的关系。”
The young knight turned back to his grizzled man-at-arms. Frostfallen leaves whispered past them, and Royce’s destrier moved restlessly. "What do you think might have killed these men, Gared?" Ser Waymar asked casually. He adjusted the drape of his long sable cloak.
年轻骑士转头面对灰发老兵。结霜的落叶在他们耳边低语飘过，罗伊斯的战马局促不安。“盖瑞，你觉得是谁杀了这些人？”威玛爵士随口问道，顺手整理他貂皮长袍的褶榈。
"It was the cold," Gared said with iron certainty. "I saw men freeze last winter, and the one before, when I was half a boy. Everyone talks about snows forty foot deep, and how the ice wind comes howling out of the north, but the real enemy is the cold. It steals up on you quieter than Will, and at first you shiver and your teeth chatter and you stamp your feet and dream of mulled wine and nice hot fires. It burns, it does. Nothing burns like the cold. But only for a while. Then it gets inside you and starts to fill you up, and after a while you don’t have the strength to fight it. It’s easier just to sit down or go to sleep. They say you don’t feel any pain toward the end. First you go weak and drowsy, and everything starts to fade, and then it’s like sinking into a sea of warm milk. Peaceful, like."
“是这该死的天气，”盖瑞斩钉截铁地说，“上次冬天来的时候（注解４）我亲眼见过人活活冻死，再之前那次也看过，当时我还是个孩子。人人都说当时积雪深达四十尺，北风冷得跟冰一样，但更正要命的是低温。它会无声无息地逮住你，比威尔还安静，起先你会发抖、牙齿打颤，两腿一伸，梦见烫过的酒，温暖的营火。它可是很烫人的，再也没别的东西像寒冷一样烫人了。但只消过了一会儿，接着它会钻进你体内，开始填满你的身体，过不了多久你就没力气抵抗。你会觉得坐下或小睡片刻要容易得多，听说到了最后完全不会觉得痛苦。你会觉得先是浑身无力，昏昏欲睡，然后一切渐渐消逝，最后，就像是淹没在热牛奶里一样，安详得很。”
"Such eloquence, Gared," Ser Waymar observed. "I never suspected you had it in you."
“我看你很有诗意嘛，”威玛爵士下了评论，“没想到你有这方面的天分。”
"I’ve had the cold in me too, lordling." Gared pulled back his hood, giving Ser Waymar a good long look at the stumps where his ears had been. "Two ears, three toes, and the little finger off my left hand. I got off light. We found my brother frozen at his watch, with a smile on his face."
“大人，我亲身体验过严寒的威力，”盖瑞往后拉开他的挡风帽，好让威玛爵士清楚看见他耳朵冻掉之后剩下的肉团。“两只耳朵，三根脚趾，还有左手的小指，我这样算是轻伤了。我大哥当年就是在站岗的时候被活活冻死，等我们找到他，他脸上却还挂着笑意。”
Ser Waymar shrugged. "You ought dress more warmly, Gared."
威玛爵士耸肩道：“我说盖瑞，你该多穿两件衣服的。”
Gared glared at the lordling, the scars around his ear holes flushed red with anger where Maester Aemon had cut the ears away. "We’ll see how warm you can dress when the winter comes." He pulled up his hood and hunched over his garron, silent and sullen.
盖瑞怒视着他的年轻长官，气得耳根发红。当年伊蒙学士（注解５）把他坏死的耳朵割去之后，现在耳洞旁还留着伤疤。“等冬天真正来临的时候，再看看你能穿得多暖。” 他拉起当风帽，缩着身子骑在马上，阴沉地不再吭声。
"If Gared said it was the cold?.?.?.?" Will began.
“既然盖瑞都说是天气的关系了……”威尔正要开口。
"Have you drawn any watches this past week, Will?"
“威尔，上礼拜你有没有站卫兵？”
"Yes, m’lord." There never was a week when he did not draw a dozen bloody watches. What was the man driving at?
“有啊，大人。”他哪个礼拜没抽到站卫兵的签，这家伙究竟想说什么？
"And how did you find the Wall?"
“长城的情形如何？”
"Weeping," Will said, frowning. He saw it clear enough, now that the lordling had pointed it out. "They couldn’t have froze. Not if the Wall was weeping. It wasn’t cold enough."
“在滴水啊，”威尔皱着眉头说。这下他听懂了。“所以说他们不是冻死的，假如城墙会滴水，表示天气还不够冷。”
Royce nodded. "Bright lad. We’ve had a few light frosts this past week, and a quick flurry of snow now and then, but surely no cold fierce enough to kill eight grown men. Men clad in fur and leather, let me remind you, with shelter near at hand, and the means of making fire." The knight’s smile was cocksure. "Will, lead us there. I would see these dead men for myself."
罗伊斯点点头。“聪明。过去这礼拜结了点霜，偶尔还下点雪，但绝对没有冷到冻死八个人的地步。更何况他们穿着保暖的毛皮御寒衣物，所处的地形足以遮挡风雪，还有足够的生火材料。”骑士露出自信满满的笑容。“威尔，带路吧，我要亲眼看看这些死人。”
And then there was nothing to be done for it. The order had been given, and honor bound them to obey.
事情演变至此，他们别无选择。既然命令都下了，也只有照办的份。
Will went in front, his shaggy little garron picking the way carefully through the undergrowth. A light snow had fallen the night before, and there were stones and roots and hidden sinks lying just under its crust, waiting for the careless and the unwary. Ser Waymar Royce came next, his great black destrier snorting impatiently. The warhorse was the wrong mount for ranging, but try and tell that to the lordling. Gared brought up the rear. The old man-at-arms muttered to himself as he rode.
威尔打前锋，骑着他那头长毛的马，在矮树丛里小小心翼翼地探路。昨夜下了一场小雪，这会儿树丛底下有许多石块、树根和水洼，一不小心就会失足。威玛•罗伊斯爵士跟在后头，他那头高壮骏马不耐烦地吐着气。巡逻任务最不适合骑战马，但贵族子弟哪听得进去？老兵盖瑞殿后，一路低声喃喃自语。
Twilight deepened. The cloudless sky turned a deep purple, the color of an old bruise, then faded to black. The stars began to come out. A half-moon rose. Will was grateful for the light.
暮色渐沉，无云的天空转为淤青般的深紫，然后没入黑幕。星星出来了，新月也升起。威尔暗自感谢星月的光亮。
"We can make a better pace than this, surely," Royce said when the moon was full risen.
“我们应该可以再走快点。”罗伊斯说。这时月亮已快升到天顶了。
"Not with this horse," Will said. Fear had made him insolent. "Perhaps my lord would care to take the lead?"
“你的马还没这份能耐，”威尔道，恐惧使得他无礼了起来。“还是少爷您要走前头试试？”
Ser Waymar Royce did not deign to reply.
威玛•罗伊斯爵士显然不屑回答。
Somewhere off in the wood a wolf howled.
---缺失---
Will pulled his garron over beneath an ancient gnarled ironwood and dismounted.
威尔在一棵长满树瘤的老铁树旁停住，然后下了马。
"Why are you stopping?" Ser Waymar asked.
“怎么停下来了？”威玛爵士问道。
"Best go the rest of the way on foot, m’lord. It’s just over that ridge."
“大人，后面的路用走的比较好，翻过那座山脊就到了。”
Royce paused a moment, staring off into the distance, his face reflective. A cold wind whispered through the trees. His great sable cloak stirred behind like something half-alive.
罗伊斯也停下来凝神远望，一脸思量的表情。一阵冷风飒飒响过林间，他的貂皮大衣在背后抖了一下，彷佛有了生命。
"There’s something wrong here," Gared muttered.
“这儿不太对劲。”盖瑞喃喃地说。
The young knight gave him a disdainful smile. "Is there?"
年轻骑士轻蔑地对他一笑。“有么？”
"Can’t you feel it?" Gared asked. "Listen to the darkness."
“你没感觉么？”盖瑞问道，“仔细听听暗处的声音。”
Will could feel it. Four years in the Night’s Watch, and he had never been so afraid. What was it?
威尔也感觉到了。在守夜人服役这四年来，他从未如此恐惧过。究竟是什么东西在作怪？
"Wind. Trees rustling. A wolf. Which sound is it that unmans you so, Gared?" When Gared did not answer, Royce slid gracefully from his saddle. He tied the destrier securely to a low-hanging limb, well away from the other horses, and drew his longsword from its sheath. Jewels glittered in its hilt, and the moonlight ran down the shining steel. It was a splendid weapon, castle-forged, and new-made from the look of it. Will doubted it had ever been swung in anger.
“风声，树叶沙沙作响，还有狼叫声。盖瑞，是哪一种声音把你吓破胆啦？”罗伊斯见盖瑞没接腔，便优雅地翻身下马。他把战马牢牢地绑在一根低垂的枝干上，跟其他两匹马离得远远的，然后抽出长剑。这是把城里打造的好剑，剑柄镶着珠宝摺摺发亮，月光在明晃晃的钢造剑身上反照出璀璨光亮，看起来是新打造的。威尔很怀疑它有没有沾过血。
"The trees press close here," Will warned. "That sword will tangle you up, m’lord. Better a knife."
“大人，这儿树长得很密，”威尔警告说，“可能会缠住您那把剑，我看您还是用短刀吧。”
"If I need instruction, I will ask for it," the young lord said. "Gared, stay here. Guard the horses."
“我需要别人指导的时候自然会开口问。”年轻贵族道，“盖瑞，你守在这里，看好马匹。”
Gared dismounted. "We need a fire. I’ll see to it."
盖瑞下马。“我来生个火。”
"How big a fool are you, old man? If there are enemies in this wood, a fire is the last thing we want."
“老头子，笨也要有个限度。要是这林子里有敌人，我们难道要生火引他们过来么？”
"There’s some enemies a fire will keep away," Gared said. "Bears and direwolves and?.?.?.?and other things?.?.?.?"
“有些东西就只怕火，”盖瑞道，“像是熊、冰原狼、还有……还有好些东西。”
Ser Waymar’s mouth became a hard line. "No fire."
威玛爵士紧抿嘴唇。“我说不准就是不准。”
Gared’s hood shadowed his face, but Will could see the hard glitter in his eyes as he stared at the knight. For a moment he was afraid the older man would go for his sword. It was a short, ugly thing, its grip discolored by sweat, its edge nicked from hard use, but Will would not have given an iron bob for the lordling’s life if Gared pulled it from its scabbard.
盖瑞的斗篷遮住了他的脸，但威尔还是看得到他瞪着骑士时的眼神。他一度害怕这老头会冲动地拔剑动粗。老头的剑虽然又短又丑，剑柄早被汗渍浸得没有了颜色，剑刃也因长期使用而布满缺口，但倘若盖瑞真的拔剑，威尔知道那贵族公子哥儿必死无疑。
Finally Gared looked down. "No fire," he muttered, low under his breath.
最后盖瑞低下头。“那就算了。”他讪讪地说。
Royce took it for acquiescence and turned away. "Lead on," he said to Will.
罗伊斯当他妥协了，“带路吧。”于是他对威尔说。
Will threaded their way through a thicket, then started up the slope to the low ridge where he had found his vantage point under a sentinel tree. Under the thin crust of snow, the ground was damp and muddy, slick footing, with rocks and hidden roots to trip you up. Will made no sound as he climbed. Behind him, he heard the soft metallic slither of the lordling’s ringmail, the rustle of leaves, and muttered curses as reaching branches grabbed at his longsword and tugged on his splendid sable cloak.
威尔领着他穿越浓密树丛，爬上低缓斜坡，朝着山脊走去，他先前便是在那儿的一棵树下找到有利的藏身处。薄薄的积雪底下，地面潮湿而泥泞，十分容易滑倒，还有石块和暗藏的树根绊你一跤。威尔爬坡时没有发出任何声音，身后却不时传来公子哥儿身上环甲的金属碰撞声，叶子沙沙作响，以及分叉枝干绊住他的长剑，勾住他漂亮貂皮斗篷时所发出的咒骂声。
The great sentinel was right there at the top of the ridge, where Will had known it would be, its lowest branches a bare foot off the ground. Will slid in underneath, flat on his belly in the snow and the mud, and looked down on the empty clearing below.
威尔知道那棵大哨兵树位于山脊的最高处，最低的枝干离地仅有一尺。于是他爬进矮树丛，平趴在残雪和泥泞里，往下头空旷的平地望。
His heart stopped in his chest. For a moment he dared not breathe. Moonlight shone down on the clearing, the ashes of the firepit, the snow-covered lean-to, the great rock, the little half-frozen stream. Everything was just as it had been a few hours ago.
他的心脏停止跳动，有好一阵子不敢呼吸。月光洒落在空地上，照出营火余烬，白雪覆盖的岩石，半结冰的小溪，全都和数小时前他所见的一模一样。
They were gone. All the bodies were gone.
唯一的差别是，所有的人都不见了。
"Gods!" he heard behind him. A sword slashed at a branch as Ser Waymar Royce gained the ridge. He stood there beside the sentinel, longsword in hand, his cloak billowing behind him as the wind came up, outlined nobly against the stars for all to see.
“诸神保佑！”他听见背后传来的声音。威玛•罗伊斯爵士挥剑劈砍树枝，总算上了坡顶。他站在哨兵树旁，手里握着宝剑，身上那件披风被吹得呼呼作响，明亮的星光清楚地勾勒出他那高贵的身姿。
"Get down!" Will whispered urgently. "Something’s wrong."
“快趴下来！”威尔焦急地低声说，“出了怪事了。”
Royce did not move. He looked down at the empty clearing and laughed. "Your dead men seem to have moved camp, Will."
罗伊斯没动，他俯瞡下面空无一人的平地笑道：“威尔，看来你说的那些死人转移阵地罗。”
Will’s voice abandoned him. He groped for words that did not come. It was not possible. His eyes swept back and forth over the abandoned campsite, stopped on the axe. A huge double-bladed battle-axe, still lying where he had seen it last, untouched. A valuable weapon?.?.?.?
威尔彷佛突然丧失了说话能力，他想找出合适的字眼，却徒劳无功。怎么会有这种事，他的视线在荒废的营地来回扫视，最后停留在那柄斧头上。这么一把巨大的双刃战斧，竟会留在原地动也没动。照说这么值钱的东西……
"On your feet, Will," Ser Waymar commanded. "There’s no one here. I won’t have you hiding under a bush."
“威尔，站起来吧。”威玛爵士命令道，“这里没人了，躲躲藏藏的，成何体统！”
Reluctantly, Will obeyed.
威尔很不情愿地照办了。
Ser Waymar looked him over with open disapproval. "I am not going back to Castle Black a failure on my first ranging. We will find these men." He glanced around. "Up the tree. Be quick about it. Look for a fire."
威玛爵士很不满地上下打量他。“我可不想第一次出巡逻任务就锻羽而归。我们一定要找到这些人。”他环顾四周。“爬到树上去看，动作快点，注意附近有没有火光。”
Will turned away, wordless. There was no use to argue. The wind was moving. It cut right through him. He went to the tree, a vaulting grey-green sentinel, and began to climb. Soon his hands were sticky with sap, and he was lost among the needles. Fear filled his gut like a meal he could not digest. He whispered a prayer to the nameless gods of the wood, and slipped his dirk free of its sheath. He put it between his teeth to keep both hands free for climbing. The taste of cold iron in his mouth gave him comfort.
威尔无言地转身，他知道辩解无益。风势转强，有如刀割。他走到高耸的笔直青灰色哨兵树旁开始往上爬。很快他便迷失在满树松针里，双手沾满了树汁。恐惧像一顿难以消化的饭菜，他向不知名的森林之神默祷，然后抽出匕首，用牙齿咬住，好空出双手攀爬。嘴里冰冷的兵器让他稍微安了点心。
Down below, the lordling called out suddenly, "Who goes there?" Will heard uncertainty in the challenge. He stopped climbing; he listened; he watched.
下头突然传来年轻贵族的喊叫声。“是谁在那里？”威尔在他的恫吓中听出了不安，便停止爬行，凝神谛听，仔细观察。
The woods gave answer: the rustle of leaves, the icy rush of the stream, a distant hoot of a snow owl.
森林给了他答案：树叶沙沙作响，冰冷的溪流潺潺，远方传来雪枭的叫声。
The Others made no sound.
异鬼无声无息地出现。
Will saw movement from the corner of his eye. Pale shapes gliding through the wood. He turned his head, glimpsed a white shadow in the darkness. Then it was gone. Branches stirred gently in the wind, scratching at one another with wooden fingers. Will opened his mouth to call down a warning, and the words seemed to freeze in his throat. Perhaps he was wrong. Perhaps it had only been a bird, a reflection on the snow, some trick of the moonlight. What had he seen, after all?
威尔的眼角余光瞄到白色身影穿过树林，他转过头，看见黑暗中一道白影，随即又消失不见。树枝在风中微微骚动，伸出木指彼此搔抓。威尔张口想出声警告，言语却冻结在他的喉头。或许他看错了，或许那不过是只鸟，或是雪地上的反光，或是月光所造成的错觉。他到底看到了什么？
"Will, where are you?" Ser Waymar called up. "Can you see anything?" He was turning in a slow circle, suddenly wary, his sword in hand. He must have felt them, as Will felt them. There was nothing to see. "Answer me! Why is it so cold?"
“威尔，你在哪？”威玛爵士朝上头喊道，“你有看到什么么？”他突然提高警觉，正手中持剑缓缓转圈。他一定也和威尔一样感觉到了。然而四周却空无一人。“快回答我！这里为什么这么冷？”
It was cold. Shivering, Will clung more tightly to his perch. His face pressed hard against the trunk of the sentinel. He could feel the sweet, sticky sap on his cheek.
这里真的非常冷。威尔颤抖着抱紧树干，脸颊贴住哨兵树的树皮。他感觉到黏稠的甜树汁流到他脸上。
A shadow emerged from the dark of the wood. It stood in front of Royce. Tall, it was, and gaunt and hard as old bones, with flesh pale as milk. Its armor seemed to change color as it moved; here it was white as new-fallen snow, there black as shadow, everywhere dappled with the deep grey-green of the trees. The patterns ran like moonlight on water with every step it took.
一道阴影突然自树林暗处冒了出来，站在罗伊斯面前。它的体型十分高大，憔悴而坚毅像是老骨头，肤色苍白如乳汁。他的盔甲似乎也随着移动而改变颜色，一会儿白如新雪，一会儿黑如晴影，缀满深林中的灰绿色。它每走一步，图案便如同水面上的粼粼月光般不断改变。
Will heard the breath go out of Ser Waymar Royce in a long hiss. "Come no farther," the lordling warned. His voice cracked like a boy’s. He threw the long sable cloak back over his shoulders, to free his arms for battle, and took his sword in both hands. The wind had stopped. It was very cold.
威尔只听见威玛•罗伊斯爵士倒抽一口冷气。“不要过来！”贵族少爷警告对方，声音却像小男孩般。他将那件长长的貂皮大衣翻到背后，好空出活动空间，然后双手握剑。 风停，酷寒彻骨。
The Other slid forward on silent feet. In its hand was a longsword like none that Will had ever seen. No human metal had gone into the forging of that blade. It was alive with moonlight, translucent, a shard of crystal so thin that it seemed almost to vanish when seen edge-on. There was a faint blue shimmer to the thing, a ghost-light that played around its edges, and somehow Will knew it was sharper than any razor.
异鬼安静地向前潜行，手中握着长剑，威尔从没见过类似的武器。那是把半透明的剑，材臼完全不是人类所使用的金属，像是一片薄薄的水晶碎片，假如平放刃面看过去，几乎看不到。它与月光相互辉映，剑身周围有股诡异的蓝光。不知怎么地，威尔明白这柄剑比任何剃刀都还要锋利。
Ser Waymar met him bravely. "Dance with me then." He lifted his sword high over his head, defiant. His hands trembled from the weight of it, or perhaps from the cold. Yet in that moment, Will thought, he was a boy no longer, but a man of the Night’s Watch.
威玛爵士勇敢地迎上前去。“既然如此，我们就来较量较量吧。”他举剑过头，语带挑衅。虽然他的手不知是因为重量或是酷寒而颤抖，威尔却觉得在那一刻，他已经不再是个软弱怯懦的少年，而是个真正的守夜人好汉。
The Other halted. Will saw its eyes; blue, deeper and bluer than any human eyes, a blue that burned like ice. They fixed on the longsword trembling on high, watched the moonlight running cold along the metal. For a heartbeat he dared to hope.
异鬼停住脚步。威尔看到了它的眼睛，那是种比任何人类眼睛都还要湛蓝深邃的颜色，如冰一般冷冷燃烧，视线停留在那把高高举起的颤抖着的剑，凝视着冷冷月光在金属剑缘流动。在那一刹那，威尔觉得事情还有转机。
They emerged silently from the shadows, twins to the first. Three of them?.?.?.?four?.?.?.?five?.?.?.?Ser Waymar may have felt the cold that came with them, but he never saw them, never heard them. Will had to call out. It was his duty. And his death, if he did. He shivered, and hugged the tree, and kept the silence.
此时它们静悄悄地从阴影里冒出来，与第一个异鬼长得如出一辙。三个、四个、五个……威玛爵士感觉到伴随它们而来的寒意，但他没看到也没听到它们的声音。威尔应该要警告他，毕竟那是他职责所在。然而他一旦出声，必死无疑。他颤抖着紧抱着树不敢作声。
The pale sword came shivering through the air.
惨白的长剑厉声划破空气。
Ser Waymar met it with steel. When the blades met, there was no ring of metal on metal; only a high, thin sound at the edge of hearing, like an animal screaming in pain. Royce checked a second blow, and a third, then fell back a step. Another flurry of blows, and he fell back again.
威玛爵士举起钢剑迎敌。然而两剑交击的时候，发出的却非金属碰撞声，而是一种位于人类听觉极限边缘，又高又细，像是动物痛苦哀嚎的声音。罗伊斯挡住第二道攻击，接着是第三道，然后退了一步。又一阵刀光剑影之后，他再度后退。
Behind him, to right, to left, all around him, the watchers stood patient, faceless, silent, the shifting patterns of their delicate armor making them all but invisible in the wood. Yet they made no move to interfere.
在他 左右两侧，背后周围，其余异鬼耐心而面无表情地伫立旁观，镗甲上不断转换的细致图案使它们在树林中格外显眼，然而它们却迟迟未出手干预。
Again and again the swords met, until Will wanted to cover his ears against the strange anguished keening of their clash. Ser Waymar was panting from the effort now, his breath steaming in the moonlight. His blade was white with frost; the Other’s danced with pale blue light.
两人不断交手，直到威尔想要捂住耳朵，再也无法忍受武器碰撞时的诡异刺耳声音。
Then Royce’s parry came a beat too late. The pale sword bit through the ringmail beneath his arm. The young lord cried out in pain. Blood welled between the rings. It steamed in the cold, and the droplets seemed red as fire where they touched the snow. Ser Waymar’s fingers brushed his side. His moleskin glove came away soaked with red.
威玛爵士的呼吸开始急促，呼出来的空气在月光下蒸腾为烟。他的长剑结满白霜，异鬼的剑则闪耀着蓝白色光芒。这时罗伊斯的一记挡格慢了一拍，惨白色的剑咬穿了他腋下的环甲。年轻贵族痛苦地喊了一声，鲜血流淌在铁环间，炽热的鲜血在冷空气中冒出蒸汽，滴下的血泊到雪地，红得像把火。威玛爵士伸手按住伤处，鼹鼠皮手套整个浸成鲜红。
The Other said something in a language that Will did not know; his voice was like the cracking of ice on a winter lake, and the words were mocking.
异鬼开口用一种威尔听不懂的语言说了几句话，声音像是冬天湖面冰层碎裂，腔调充满嘲弄。
Ser Waymar Royce found his fury. "For Robert!" he shouted, and he came up snarling, lifting the frost-covered longsword with both hands and swinging it around in a flat sidearm slash with all his weight behind it. The Other’s parry was almost lazy.
威玛•罗伊斯爵士找回了怒气。“劳勃国王万岁！”他高声怒吼，双手紧握他覆满白霜的长剑，使尽全身力气疯狂挥舞。异鬼简直懒得理他。
When the blades touched, the steel shattered.
两剑相击，铜剑应声碎裂。
A scream echoed through the forest night, and the longsword shivered into a hundred brittle pieces, the shards scattering like a rain of needles. Royce went to his knees, shrieking, and covered his eyes. Blood welled between his fingers.
尖叫声回荡在深夜树林里，罗伊斯的长剑裂成几百片碎片，碎片如同一阵针雨四散甩落。罗伊斯惨叫着跪下，伸手抢住双眼，鲜血从他指缝间汨汨流下。
The watchers moved forward together, as if some signal had been given. Swords rose and fell, all in a deathly silence. It was cold butchery. The pale blades sliced through ringmail as if it were silk. Will closed his eyes. Far beneath him, he heard their voices and laughter sharp as icicles.
旁观的异鬼彷佛接收到了什么讯号，这时一涌向前。一片死寂中，剑雨纷飞，这是场冷酷的屠杀。惨白的剑刀砍丝般切进环甲。威尔闭上眼睛。听见地面上远远传来它们的谈笑声，尖利一如冰针。
When he found the courage to look again, a long time had passed, and the ridge below was empty.
良久，他终于鼓起勇气睁开眼睛。树下的山脊空无一人。
He stayed in the tree, scarce daring to breathe, while the moon crept slowly across the black sky. Finally, his muscles cramping and his fingers numb with cold, he climbed down.
月亮缓缓爬过漆黑的天幕，但他依旧留在树上，吓得连呼吸也不大敢。最后，他驱动抽筋的肌肉和冻僵的手指，爬回树下。
Royce’s body lay facedown in the snow, one arm outflung. The thick sable cloak had been slashed in a dozen places. Lying dead like that, you saw how young he was. A boy.
罗伊斯的尸体面朝下倒卧在雪地里，一只手臂朝外伸。厚重的貂皮披风被砍得惨不忍睹。看到他命丧于此，你才会发现他原来有多年轻，不过是个大孩子罢了。
He found what was left of the sword a few feet away, the end splintered and twisted like a tree struck by lightning. Will knelt, looked around warily, and snatched it up. The broken sword would be his proof. Gared would know what to make of it, and if not him, then surely that old bear Mormont or Maester Aemon. Would Gared still be waiting with the horses? He had to hurry.
他在几尺外找到断剑的残骸，剑身像遭雷极的树顶支离破碎。威尔弯下身，小心地环顾四周，然后才把剑捡起来。他要拿这柄断剑做为证物，盖瑞会知道该怎么做。就算他不知道，“熊老”莫尔蒙或伊蒙学士也一定有办法。盖瑞还守着马匹等他回去么？最好加快脚步。
Will rose. Ser Waymar Royce stood over him.
威尔起身。威玛•罗伊斯爵士站在他面前。
His fine clothes were a tatter, his face a ruin. A shard from his sword transfixed the blind white pupil of his left eye.
他的华裳尽碎，容貌全毁，断剑的一块裂片反映出左眼瞳孔的一片茫然。
The right eye was open. The pupil burned blue. It saw.
他的右眼却是张开的，眼瞳中烧着蓝火，看着。
The broken sword fell from nerveless fingers. Will closed his eyes to pray. Long, elegant hands brushed his cheek, then tightened around his throat. They were gloved in the finest moleskin and sticky with blood, yet the touch was icy cold.
断剑从威尔无力的手里落下，他闭眼默祷。优雅修长的双手拂过他两颊，然后掐住他的咽喉。这双手虽然包裹在最上等的鼹鼠皮手套理，而且满是黏稠血块，却冰冷无比。

1．BRAN
#ch 第一章 布兰
The morning had dawned clear and cold, with a crispness that hinted at the end of summer. They set forth at daybreak to see a man beheaded, twenty in all, and Bran rode among them, nervous with excitement. This was the first time he had been deemed old enough to go with his lord father and his brothers to see the king’s justice done. It was the ninth year of summer, and the seventh of Bran’s life.
晨色清冷，带着一丝寂寥，隐然暗示夏日将尽。为数二十人的队伍于破晓时分轻骑启程，布兰策马置身其间，满心焦虑又兴奋难耐。这次他年纪总算够大，可以与父兄同往刑场，目睹国王律法的执行。这是夏天的第九年，布兰现年七岁。
The man had been taken outside a small holdfast in the hills. Robb thought he was a wildling, his sword sworn to Mance Rayder, the King-beyond-the-Wall. It made Bran’s skin prickle to think of it. He remembered the hearth tales Old Nan told them. The wildlings were cruel men, she said, slavers and slayers and thieves. They consorted with giants and ghouls, stole girl children in the dead of night, and drank blood from polished horns. And their women lay with the Others in the Long Night to sire terrible half-human children.
死囚已被领至小丘上的平房外，罗柏认为他是个誓死效忠“境外之王”曼斯•雷德的野人。布兰回想起老奶妈在火炉边说过的故事，不禁浑身起了鸡皮疙瘩。她说野人生性凶残蛮狠，个个都是贩卖奴隶、杀人放火的偷盗之徒。他们与巨人族和食尸鬼狼狈为奸，在暗夜里诱拐童女、以磨亮的兽角茹毛饮血。他们的女人则相传在远古的“长夜”里与异鬼苟合，繁衍半人半鬼的恐怖后代。
But the man they found bound hand and foot to the holdfast wall awaiting the king’s justice was old and scrawny, not much taller than Robb. He had lost both ears and a finger to frostbite, and he dressed all in black, the same as a brother of the Night’s Watch, except that his furs were ragged and greasy.
然而眼前这个老人却削瘦枯槁，比罗柏高不了多少，手脚紧缚身后，静待国王意旨发落。他在酷寒中因冻疮失去了双耳和一根手指，全身衣着漆黑，与守夜人弟兄们的臸服没有两样，只不过他的衣衫褴褛，而且脓疮四溢。
The breath of man and horse mingled, steaming, in the cold morning air as his lord father had the man cut down from the wall and dragged before them. Robb and Jon sat tall and still on their horses, with Bran between them on his pony, trying to seem older than seven, trying to pretend that he’d seen all this before. A faint wind blew through the holdfast gate. Over their heads flapped the banner of the Starks of Winterfell: a grey direwolf racing across an ice-white field.
人马呼息在清晨的冷空气里交织成蒸腾的雪白雾网，父亲下令将墙边的人犯松绑，抱到队伍前面。罗柏和琼恩直挺背脊，昂然跨坐鞍背；布兰则骑着小马在两人中间，努力想要表现出七岁孩童所没有的成熟气度，彷佛眼前一切他早已司空见惯。微风吹过栅门，众人头顶飘扬着临冬城史塔克家族的旗臶，上头画着白底灰色的冰原奔狼。
Bran’s father sat solemnly on his horse, long brown hair stirring in the wind. His closely trimmed beard was shot with white, making him look older than his thirty-five years. He had a grim cast to his grey eyes this day, and he seemed not at all the man who would sit before the fire in the evening and talk softly of the age of heroes and the children of the forest. He had taken off Father’s face, Bran thought, and donned the face of Lord Stark of Winterfell.
父亲神情肃穆地骑在马上，满头棕色长发在风里飞扬。他修剪整齐的胡子冒出几缕白丝，看起来比三十五岁的实际年龄还要老些。这天他的灰色眼瞳严厉无情，怎么看也不像是那个会在风雪夜里端坐火炉前，娓娓细述远古英雄时代和森林之子（注解１）故事的人。他已经摘下慈父的容颜，而戴上了临冬城主史塔克公爵的面具，布兰心想。
There were questions asked and answers given there in the chill of morning, but afterward Bran could not recall much of what had been said. Finally his lord father gave a command, and two of his guardsmen dragged the ragged man to the ironwood stump in the center of the square. They forced his head down onto the hard black wood. Lord Eddard Stark dismounted and his ward Theon Greyjoy brought forth the sword. "Ice," that sword was called. It was as wide across as a man’s hand, and taller even than Robb. The blade was Valyrian steel, spell-forged and dark as smoke. Nothing held an edge like Valyrian steel.
清晨的寒意里，布兰听到有人问了些问题，以及问题的答案，然而事后他却想不起来究竟说过了哪些话。总之最后父亲下了命令，两名卫士便把那衣衫褴褛的人拖到空地中央的铁树木桩前，把他的头硬是按在漆黑的坚硬木头上。艾德•史塔克解鞍下马，他的养子（注解２）席恩•葛雷乔伊立刻递上宝剑。剑叫做“寒冰”，剑身宽过手掌，立起来比罗柏还长。刺刀是用瓦雷利亚钢锻造而成，受过法术加持，颜色暗如黑烟。世上没有任河东西比瓦雷利亚钢更锐利。
His father peeled off his gloves and handed them to Jory Cassel, the captain of his household guard. He took hold of Ice with both hands and said, "In the name of Robert of the House Baratheon, the First of his Name, King of the Andals and the Rhoynar and the First Men, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms and Protector of the Realm, by the word of Eddard of the House Stark, Lord of Winterfell and Warden of the North, I do sentence you to die." He lifted the greatsword high above his head.
父亲脱下手套，交给侍卫队长乔里•凯索，然后双手擎剑，开口朗声说道：“以安达尔人、洛伊拿人及先民的国王，七国统治者（注解３）暨全境守护者，拜拉席恩家族的劳勃一世之名，我临冬城主与北境统领，史塔克家族的艾德，在此宣判你死刑。”语毕后，他高举巨剑过头。
Bran’s bastard brother Jon Snow moved closer. "Keep the pony well in hand," he whispered. "And don’t look away. Father will know if you do."
布兰的异母哥哥琼恩•雪诺凑了过来。“握紧缰绳，别让马儿乱动。还有千万别把头转开，不然父亲会知道的。”
Bran kept his pony well in hand, and did not look away.
于是布兰紧握缰绳，没让小马乱动，也没有把头转开。
His father took off the man’s head with a single sure stroke. Blood sprayed out across the snow, as red as surnmerwine. One of the horses reared and had to be restrained to keep from bolting. Bran could not take his eyes off the blood. The snows around the stump drank it eagerly, reddening as he watched.
父亲巨剑一挥，利落地砍下死囚首级。鲜血溅洒在雪地上，殷红一如夏日的葡萄美酿。队伍中一匹马嘶声跃起，差点就要发狂乱跑。布兰目不转睛地直视血迹，树干旁的白雪饥渴地啜饮鲜血，在他的注视下迅速染成红色。
The head bounced off a thick root and rolled. It came up near Greyjoy’s feet. Theon was a lean, dark youth of nineteen who found everything amusing. He laughed, put his boot on the head, and kicked it away.
人头翻过树根，滚至葛雷乔伊脚边。席恩是个身形精瘦，肤色黝黑的十九岁青年，对任何事物都觉得兴致勃勃。他咧嘴一笑，抬腿踢开人头。
"Ass," Jon muttered, low enough so Greyjoy did not hear. He put a hand on Bran’s shoulder, and Bran looked over at his bastard brother. "You did well," Jon told him solemnly. Jon was fourteen, an old hand at justice.
“混帐东西！”琼恩低声咒道，刻意放低声音不让葛雷乔伊听见。他伸手搭住布兰肩膀，布兰也转头看着自己的私生子哥哥。”你做得很好。“琼恩神情庄重地告诉他。琼恩今年十四岁，观看死刑对他来说已是司空见惯。
It seemed colder on the long ride back to Winterfell, though the wind had died by then and the sun was higher in the sky. Bran rode with his brothers, well ahead of the main party, his pony struggling hard to keep up with their horses.
冷风已息，暖阳高照，但返回临冬城的漫漫长路却似乎更加寒冷。布兰与兄长并骑，远远地走在队伍前头，他跨下小马气喘吁吁地跟上其他坐骑的迅捷脚步。
"The deserter died bravely," Robb said. He was big and broad and growing every day, with his mother’s coloring, the fair skin, red-brown hair, and blue eyes of the Tullys of Riverrun. "He had courage, at the least."
“这逃兵死得挺勇敢。”罗柏说。高大壮硕的他每天都在长大，同时遗传了母亲的白皙肤色、红褐头发，以及徒利家族的蓝色眼眸。“不管怎么说，好歹他有点勇气。”
"No," Jon Snow said quietly. "It was not courage. This one was dead of fear. You could see it in his eyes, Stark." Jon’s eyes were a grey so dark they seemed almost black, but there was little they did not see. He was of an age with Robb, but they did not look alike. Jon was slender where Robb was muscular, dark where Robb was fair, graceful and quick where his half brother was strong and fast.
“不对，”琼恩静静地说，“那不算是勇气。史塔克，这家伙正是因为害怕而死的，你可以从他的眼神里看出来。” 琼恩的灰色眼瞳颜色深得近乎墨黑，但世间少有事物能逃过他的观察。他与罗柏同年，但两人容貌大相径庭。罗柏肌肉发达，皮肤白皙，强壮而动作迅速；琼恩则是体格精瘦，肤色沉黑，举止优雅而敏捷。
Robb was not impressed. "The Others take his eyes," he swore. "He died well. Race you to the bridge?"
罗柏不以为然。“叫异鬼把他眼睛给挖了吧，”他咒道，“他总算是死得壮烈。怎么样，比赛谁先到桥边？”
"Done," Jon said, kicking his horse forward. Robb cursed and followed, and they galloped off down the trail, Robb laughing and hooting, Jon silent and intent. The hooves of their horses kicked up showers of snow as they went.
“一言为定。”琼恩语毕两脚往马肚一夹，纵马前奔。罗柏咒骂几句后也追了上去，两人沿着路径向前急驰。罗柏又叫又笑，琼恩则稳静专注。马蹄在两人身后溅起一片白色雪花。
Bran did not try to follow. His pony could not keep up. He had seen the ragged man’s eyes, and he was thinking of them now. After a while, the sound of Robb’s laughter receded, and the woods grew silent again.
布兰没有跟上去，他的小马没这般能耐。他方才见到了死囚的眼睛，现在陷入沉思。
So deep in thought was he that he never heard the rest of the party until his father moved up to ride beside him. "Are you well, Bran?" he asked, not unkindly.
没过多久，罗柏的笑声渐远，林间归于寂静。 太过专注于沉思的他，丝毫没注意到其他队伍赶上自己，直到父亲骑到他身边，语带关切地问道：“布兰，你还好吧？”
"Yes, Father," Bran told him. He looked up. Wrapped in his furs and leathers, mounted on his great warhorse, his lord father loomed over him like a giant. "Robb says the man died bravely, but Jon says he was afraid."
“父亲大人，我很好。”布兰应答，他抬头仰望父亲，父亲穿着毛皮大衣和皮革护甲，骑在雄骏战马上如同巨人般笼罩住他。“罗柏说刚才那个人死得很勇敢，琼恩却说他死的时候很害怕。”
"What do you think?" his father asked.
“你自己怎么想呢？”他的父亲问道。
Bran thought about it. "Can a man still be brave if he’s afraid?"
布兰寻思片刻后反问：“一个人害怕的时候还能够勇敢么？”
"That is the only time a man can be brave," his father told him. "Do you understand why I did it?"
“一个人唯有在害怕的时候才能够勇敢。”父亲告诉他，“你知道为什么我要杀他么？”
"He was a wildling," Bran said. "They carry off women and sell them to the Others."
“因为他是野人，”布兰回答，“他们绑架女人，然后把她们卖给异鬼。”
His lord father smiled. "Old Nan has been telling you stories again. In truth, the man was an oathbreaker, a deserter from the Night’s Watch. No man is more dangerous. The deserter knows his life is forfeit if he is taken, so he will not flinch from any crime, no matter how vile. But you mistake me. The question was not why the man had to die, but why I must do it."
父亲微笑道：“老奶妈又跟你说那些故事了。那人其实是个逃兵，背弃了守夜人的誓言。世间最危险的人莫过于此，因为他们知道自己一旦被捕，只有死路一条，于是恶向胆边生，再怎么伤天害理的事也干得出来。不过你误解我的意思了，我不是问你他为什么要死，而是我为何要亲自行刑。”
Bran had no answer for that. "King Robert has a headsman," he said, uncertainly.
布兰想不出答案。“我只知道劳勃国王有个刽子手。”他不太确定地说。
"He does," his father admitted. "As did the Targaryen kings before him. Yet our way is the older way. The blood of the First Men still flows in the veins of the Starks, and we hold to the belief that the man who passes the sentence should swing the sword. If you would take a man’s life, you owe it to him to look into his eyes and hear his final words. And if you cannot bear to do that, then perhaps the man does not deserve to die.
“他确实是有刽子手代劳，”他父亲承认，“在他之前的坦格利安王朝也是如此。但我们遵循古老的传统，史塔克家的人体内仍流有先民的血液，而我们相信判决死刑的人必须亲自动手。如果你要取人性命，你至少应该注视他的双眼，聆听他的临终遗言。假如做不到这点，那么或许他罪不致死。”
"One day, Bran, you will be Robb’s bannerman, holding a keep of your own for your brother and your king, and justice will fall to you. When that day comes, you must take no pleasure in the task, but neither must you look away. A ruler who hides behind paid executioners soon forgets what death is."
“布兰，有朝一日你会成为罗柏的家臣，为你哥哥和国王治理属于你自己的领地，届时你也必须执掌律法。当那天来临的时候，你绝不可以杀戮为乐，亦不可逃避责任。统治者若是躲在幕后，付钱给刽子手执行，很快就会忘记死亡为何物。”
That was when Jon reappeared on the crest of the hill before them. He waved and shouted down at them. "Father, Bran, come quickly, see what Robb has found!" Then he was gone again.
这时琼恩出现在他们面前的坡值，他挥手朝下大喊：“父亲大人，布兰，快来看看罗柏找到了什么！“随即又消失在丘陵的彼方。
Jory rode up beside them. "Trouble, my lord?"
乔里赶上前来，“大人，出事了么？”
"Beyond a doubt," his lord father said. "Come, let us see what mischief my sons have rooted out now." He sent his horse into a trot. Jory and Bran and the rest came after.
“那还用说，”他的领主父亲说道，“来罢，我们去看看我那调皮的儿子又闯了什么祸。” 他策马狂奔，乔里和布兰以及其他人也跟了上去。
They found Robb on the riverbank north of the bridge, with Jon still mounted beside him. The late summer snows had been heavy this moonturn. Robb stood knee-deep in white, his hood pulled back so the sun shone in his hair. He was cradling something in his arm, while the boys talked in hushed, excited voices.
他们在桥北河畔找到罗柏，琼恩仍在马上。这个月来晚夏的积雪沉厚，罗柏站在及膝深雪里，披风后敞，阳光在他发际闪耀。他怀里抱着不知什么东西，正和琼恩两人兴奋地窃语交谈。
The riders picked their way carefully through the drifts, groping for solid footing on the hidden, uneven ground. Jory Cassel and Theon Greyjoy were the first to reach the boys. Greyjoy was laughing and joking as he rode. Bran heard the breath go out of him. "Gods!" he exclaimed, struggling to keep control of his horse as he reached for his sword.
队伍骑着马小心地穿过河面的诸多漂浮物，寻找隐藏于雪地下崎岖地面的立足点。乔里•凯索和席恩•葛雷乔伊最先赶到男孩身边。葛雷乔伊原本还有说有笑，紧接着布兰却听见他倒抽一口气：“诸神保佑！”他惊叫着伸手拔剑，一边还挣扎着要稳住坐骑。
Jory’s sword was already out. "Robb, get away from it!" he called as his horse reared under him.
乔里的配剑已然出鞘，“罗柏，离那东西远点！”他才叫出声，坐骑便已前脚高举跳了起来。
Robb grinned and looked up from the bundle in his arms. "She can’t hurt you," he said. "She’s dead, Jory."
罗柏怀里抱着一团东西，这时嘻嘻笑着抬起头，“它伤不了你的，”他说道，“乔里，它已经死啦。”
Bran was afire with curiosity by then. He would have spurred the pony faster, but his father made them dismount beside the bridge and approach on foot. Bran jumped off and ran.
布兰满心好奇，焦躁不安，一心只想叫鞍下小马再跑快点，但父亲却要他在桥边下马，徒步过去。他迫不及待地跳下马，三步并作两步地跑了过去。
By then Jon, Jory, and Theon Greyjoy had all dismounted as well. "What in the seven hells is it?" Greyjoy was saying.
等他到的时候，琼恩、乔里和席恩•葛雷乔伊都已经下马了。“这是什么鬼东西？”葛雷乔伊喃喃说道。
"A wolf," Robb told him.
“狼。”罗柏告诉他。
"A freak," Greyjoy said. "Look at the size of it."
“胡说，”葛雷乔伊反驳，“狼哪有这么大的？”
Bran’s heart was thumping in his chest as he pushed through a waist-high drift to his brothers’ side.
布兰的心脏砰砰狂跳，推开一堆及腰的漂浮物，奔至兄长身旁。
Half-buried in bloodstained snow, a huge dark shape slumped in death. Ice had formed in its shaggy grey fur, and the faint smell of corruption clung to it like a woman’s perfume. Bran glimpsed blind eyes crawling with maggots, a wide mouth full of yellowed teeth. But it was the size of it that made him gasp. It was bigger than his pony, twice the size of the largest hound in his father’s kennel.
一个巨大的暗黝身形半掩在血渍斑驳的雪堆埋，绵软而无生息。蓬松的灰色绒毛已经结冰，腐朽的气味紧附其间，就像是女人身上的香水那样，布兰隐约瞥见它无神的眼窝里爬满蛆虫，咧嘴内满是黄牙。但真正吓到他的是这只狼的大小，它比他的小马还大，比他父亲最大的猎大还要大上两倍。
"It’s no freak," Jon said calmly. "That’s a direwolf. They grow larger than the other kind."
“我没骗你，”琼恩正色道，“这确实是冰原狼没错，因为他们比其他狼都还要来得大！”
Theon Greyjoy said, "There’s not been a direwolf sighted south of the Wall in two hundred years."
席恩•葛雷乔伊说：“可是两百年来，绝境长城以南没人见过半条冰原狼。”
"I see one now," Jon replied.
“现在不就见到一只了吗？”琼恩回答。
Bran tore his eyes away from the monster. That was when he noticed the bundle in Robb’s arms. He gave a cry of delight and moved closer. The pup was a tiny ball of grey-black fur, its eyes still closed. It nuzzled blindly against Robb’s chest as he cradled it, searching for milk among his leathers, making a sad little whimpery sound. Bran reached out hesitantly. "Go on," Robb told him. "You can touch him."
布兰努力将视线扯离面前的怪物，这才注意到罗柏怀里抱着的东西。他高兴得叫了一声，随即靠过去。那只幼狼只是团灰黑色的毛球，双眼仍未张开。它盲目地往罗柏胸膛上磨踏，在他的皮护甲上寻找奶头，发出哀伤的低吟声。布兰有些犹豫地探出手，“没关系，”罗柏告诉他，“你可以摸摸看。”
Bran gave the pup a quick nervous stroke, then turned as Jon said, "Here you go." His half brother put a second pup into his arms. "There are five of them." Bran sat down in the snow and hugged the wolf pup to his face. Its fur was soft and warm against his cheek.
布兰非常紧张，很快碰了小狼一下，听到琼恩的声音，他转过头。“瞧，这只是给你的。”他的私生子哥哥把第二头幼狼放进他怀里。“总共有五只呢。”布兰在雪地里坐下，把小狼温软的皮毛贴近自己脸颊。
"Direwolves loose in the realm, after so many years," muttered Hullen, the master of horse. "I like it not."
“经过了这么多年，冰原狼突然重现人间，”马房总管胡伦喃喃道，“这种事我可不喜欢。”
"It is a sign," Jory said.
“这是个坏兆头。”乔里说。
Father frowned. "This is only a dead animal, Jory," he said. Yet he seemed troubled. Snow crunched under his boots as he moved around the body. "Do we know what killed her?"
父亲皱起眉头。“乔里，不过是头死狼罢了。”他说道，但脸庞却蒙上了一层阴霾。他绕着狼尸，积雪在他脚下碎裂。“知道它被什么杀死的么？”
"There’s something in the throat," Robb told him, proud to have found the answer before his father even asked. "There, just under the jaw."
“喉咙里好像有东西。”罗柏得意地回答，暗自为他在父亲提出疑问前便找到解答感到骄傲。 “就在下巴底下。”
His father knelt and groped under the beast’s head with his hand. He gave a yank and held it up for all to see. A foot of shattered antler, tines snapped off, all wet with blood.
他的父亲蹲了下来，伸手探向狼尸的头底下，使劲一拧，举起让大家看。那是一只碎裂的鹿角，原本的分叉断尽，染满了鲜血。
A sudden silence descended over the party. The men looked at the antler uneasily, and no one dared to speak. Even Bran could sense their fear, though he did not understand.
一阵突如其来的寂静笼罩了队伍，众人局促不安地看着那只鹿角，没有人敢出声说话。布兰虽然不了解旁人为何惊恐，却也能感觉到他们的害怕。
His father tossed the antler to the side and cleansed his hands in the snow. "I’m surprised she lived long enough to whelp," he said. His voice broke the spell.
父亲扔开鹿角，在雪地里把手清了干净。“没想到它还有力气把孩子生下来。”他的声音打破了先前的沉默。
"Maybe she didn’t," Jory said. "I’ve heard tales?.?.?.?maybe the bitch was already dead when the pups came."
“也许它没撑那么久，”乔里说，“我听过这样的传说……也许小狼诞生时母狼就已经死了。”
"Born with the dead," another man put in. "Worse luck."
“伴随死亡而诞生，”另外一个人接口道，“这是更坏的兆头。”
"No matter," said Hullen. "They be dead soon enough too."
“没差，”胡伦说，“反正这些小家伙也活不长了。”
Bran gave a wordless cry of dismay.
布兰发出了无声的失望叹息。
"The sooner the better," Theon Greyjoy agreed. He drew his sword. "Give the beast here, Bran."
“我看死得越快越好，”席恩•葛雷乔伊同意，他抽出配剑。“布兰，把那东西丢过来。
The little thing squirmed against him, as if it heard and understood. "No!" Bran cried out fiercely. "It’s mine."
“布兰怀中的小东西彷佛听懂人话，偎着他蠕动了一下。“不要！”他坚决地叫道，“它是我的。”
"Put away your sword, Greyjoy," Robb said. For a moment he sounded as commanding as their father, like the lord he would someday be. "We will keep these pups."
“葛雷乔伊，把剑拿开。”罗柏说道，就在那一刹那，他听起来像父亲般一样威严有力，正如他有朝一日将成为的一方领主。“我们要养这些小狼。”
"You cannot do that, boy," said Harwin, who was Hullen’s son.
“孩子，这是行不通的。”胡伦的儿子哈尔温道。
"It be a mercy to kill them," Hullen said.
“杀了它们才是慈悲啊。”胡伦接口说。
Bran looked to his lord father for rescue, but got only a frown, a furrowed brow. "Hullen speaks truly, son. Better a swift death than a hard one from cold and starvation."
布兰朝父亲望去，盼望能找到救兵，但只见到深锁双眉。“好儿子，胡伦说的没错。与其让它们挨饿受冻，不如趁早了结干脆。”
"No!" He could feel tears welling in his eyes, and he looked away. He did not want to cry in front of his father.
“不要！”他已经感觉到眼泪在眼眶里打转，于是转开目光，他可不想在父亲面前落泪。
Robb resisted stubbornly. "Ser Rodrik’s red bitch whelped again last week," he said. "It was a small litter, only two live pups. She’ll have milk enough."
罗柏固执地继续抗拒。“罗德利克爵士的那头红母狗上礼拜才刚生产，”他说，“那胎死了不少，只有两只小狗活了下来，奶水应该还够它们喝。”
"She’ll rip them apart when they try to nurse."
“这些小狼只要一走近想喝奶，就会被它撕成碎片。”
"Lord Stark," Jon said. It was strange to hear him call Father that, so formal. Bran looked at him with desperate hope. "There are five pups," he told Father. "Three male, two female."
“史塔克大人，”琼恩说道。听他如此正式地称呼自己父亲，实在很怪。布兰抱着最后一丝希望看着他。“总共有五只小狼，”他告诉父亲，“三只公的，两只母的。”
"What of it, Jon?"
“琼恩，这有什么意义么？”
"You have five trueborn children," Jon said. "Three sons, two daughters. The direwolf is the sigil of your House. Your children were meant to have these pups, my lord."
“您有五个孩子，”琼恩回答，“三个儿子，两个女儿。冰原狼又是你们的家微，大人，您的孩子们注定要拥有这些小狼的。”
Bran saw his father’s face change, saw the other men exchange glances. He loved Jon with all his heart at that moment. Even at seven, Bran understood what his brother had done. The count had come right only because Jon had omitted himself. He had included the girls, included even Rickon, the baby, but not the bastard who bore the surname Snow, the name that custom decreed be given to all those in the north unlucky enough to be born with no name of their own.
布兰看到父亲的脸色转变，其他人交换眼神，就在那一刻，他全心全意地爱着琼恩。 虽然他只有七岁，布兰仍旧很清楚自己的私生子哥哥这样做所代表的意义，他可是把自己排除在父亲的子嗣之外，才会刚好凑成数的。他把两个女孩都算了进去，甚至连襁褓中的小瑞肯也有分。但他却没有算冠着雪诺这个私生子姓氏的自己。雷诺这个姓氏是专门用来给那些在北方出生，却不幸没有父亲的人用的。
Their father understood as well. "You want no pup for yourself, Jon?" he asked softly.
父亲也明白这点。“琼恩，你自己不想要小狼么？”他轻声问道。
"The direwolf graces the banners of House Stark," Jon pointed out. "I am no Stark, Father."
“冰原狼是史塔克家族的辬志，”琼恩指出，“父亲大人，我并非史塔克家族一员啊。”
Their lord father regarded Jon thoughtfully. Robb rushed into the silence he left. "I will nurse him myself, Father," he promised. "I will soak a towel with warm milk, and give him suck from that."
父亲若有所思地看了琼恩一眼，罗柏急切地打破沉默。“父亲，我会亲自喂养小狼的。”他保证道，“我会用浸过温牛奶的湿毛巾喂它。“
"Me too!" Bran echoed.
“我也会。”布兰连忙跟进。
The lord weighed his sons long and carefully with his eyes. "Easy to say, and harder to do. I will not have you wasting the servants’ time with this. If you want these pups, you will feed them yourselves. Is that understood?"
公爵意味深长地审视儿子，“说起来简单，其要做可不容易。我不会让你们占用仆人时间的。如果你们更要养这群小狼，就得一切自己来，知道么？”
Bran nodded eagerly. The pup squirmed in his grasp, licked at his face with a warm tongue.
布兰热切地忙点头，小狼蜷缩在他怀里，伸出温热的舌头舔了他的脸颊。
"You must train them as well," their father said. "You must train them. The kennelmaster will have nothing to do with these monsters, I promise you that. And the gods help you if you neglect them, or brutalize them, or train them badly. These are not dogs to beg for treats and slink off at a kick. A direwolf will rip a man’s arm off his shoulder as easily as a dog will kill a rat. Are you sure you want this?"
“你们还得亲自训练它们，”父亲又道，“我保证驯兽长和这些怪物将毫无干系。倘若你们把它们训练得残忍成性，或有什么闪失，那么就祈祷天上诸神保佑吧。这些可不是讨好卖乖的狗，也不是随便踢一脚就能打发的角色。冰原狼要扯下人的胳膊就和狗杀老鼠一样简单，你们确定要养么？”
"Yes, Father," Bran said.
“是的，父亲大人。”布兰答道。
"Yes," Robb agreed.
“嗯。”罗柏同意道。
"The pups may die anyway, despite all you do."
“即使你们费尽苦心，小狼还是有夭折的可能。”
"They won’t die," Robb said. "We won’t let them die."
“不会，”罗柏说，“我们不会让它们死掉的。”
"Keep them, then. Jory, Desmond, gather up the other pups. It’s time we were back to Winterfell."
“那就留着它们吧。乔里，戴斯蒙，把其他几只小狼也都带着，我们也该回临冬城去了。”
It was not until they were mounted and on their way that Bran allowed himself to taste the sweet air of victory. By then, his pup was snuggled inside his leathers, warm against him, safe for the long ride home. Bran was wondering what to name him.
一直到他们骑马踏上归途，布兰才允许自己享受胜利的喜悦。他的小狼正安全地藏靠在他的皮护甲里，他不禁想该为它取什么名字才好。
Halfway across the bridge, Jon pulled up suddenly.
走到桥中间时，琼恩突然勒住马缰。
"What is it, Jon?" their lord father asked.
“琼恩，怎么了？”公爵父亲问道。
"Can’t you hear it?"
“你们没听到么？”
Bran could hear the wind in the trees, the clatter of their hooves on the ironwood planks, the whimpering of his hungry pup, but Jon was listening to something else.
布兰只听见林间风声和达达马蹄，怀间嗷嗷待哺的五只小狼，但琼恩正侧耳倾听别的事物。
"There," Jon said. He swung his horse around and galloped back across the bridge. They watched him dismount where the direwolf lay dead in the snow, watched him kneel. A moment later he was riding back to them, smiling.
“在那里。”琼恩道，他掉转马头，急驰过桥，大家看着他在母狼尸体旁下马，看着他屈膝跪下，一会儿后他骑马回来，笑容满面。
"He must have crawled away from the others," Jon said.
“这只一定是先爬开了。”琼恩说。
"Or been driven away," their father said, looking at the sixth pup. His fur was white, where the rest of the litter was grey. His eyes were as red as the blood of the ragged man who had died that morning. Bran thought it curious that this pup alone would have opened his eyes while the others were still blind.
“或是被赶开的。”他们的父亲看着第六只小狼说道。它的毛色净白，其他的小狼则多半灰黑，它的眼瞳红如早上死囚的鲜血。布兰很觉好奇，为何其他小狼眼睛都还没睁开，唯独它双目炯炯有神。
"An albino," Theon Greyjoy said with wry amusement. "This one will die even faster than the others."
“白子，”席恩•葛雷乔伊话里有种兴味十足的讥讽，“只怕这只会死得比其他都还快。”
Jon Snow gave his father’s ward a long, chilling look. "I think not, Greyjoy," he said. "This one belongs to me."
琼恩•雪诺给了他父亲的养子一个意味深长的冷绝凝视，“葛雷乔伊，我可不这么认为。”琼恩答道，“因为这是我的狼。”

2．CATELYN
#ch 第二章 凯特琳
Catelyn had never liked this godswood.
凯特琳向来不喜欢这座神木林。
She had been born a Tully, at Riverrun far to the south, on the Red Fork of the Trident. The godswood there was a garden, bright and airy, where tall redwoods spread dappled shadows across tinkling streams, birds sang from hidden nests, and the air was spicy with the scent of flowers.
出身南境徒利家族的她，自小在红叉河畔的奔流城长大。红叉河是三叉戟河的支流，那里的神木林是座明亮清朗的花园，高大的红木树影洒进沟磷溪涧，鸟儿在栖隐巢穴里高唱，空气中弥漫百花馨香。
The gods of Winterfell kept a different sort of wood. It was a dark, primal place, three acres of old forest untouched for ten thousand years as the gloomy castle rose around it. It smelled of moist earth and decay. No redwoods grew here. This was a wood of stubborn sentinel trees armored in grey-green needles, of mighty oaks, of ironwoods as old as the realm itself. Here thick black trunks crowded close together while twisted branches wove a dense canopy overhead and misshappen roots wrestled beneath the soil. This was a place of deep silence and brooding shadows, and the gods who lived here had no names.
临冬城信仰的神只则是另一番气象。这是个阴暗原始的地方，昏暝古堡巍然独立其间，万年古木样亘周边三英亩，散发出湿意和腐败的气味。此地不生红木，树林由披戴着灰绿松针的哨兵树、壮实的橡树，以及与王国同样苍老的铁树所组成。在这里粗壮厚实的黑色树干相互攘挤，扭曲的枝桠在头顶织就一片浓密的参天树顶，变形的错节盘根则在地底彼此角力。这是个属于深沉寂静和窒郁暗影的地方，而蛰居其间的神只连名字也付之阙如。
But she knew she would find her husband here tonight. Whenever he took a man’s life, afterward he would seek the quiet of the godswood.
但她知道今晚可以在这里找到丈夫。每回他取人性命后，总会来此觅求神木林的宁静。
Catelyn had been anointed with the seven oils and named in the rainbow of light that filled the sept of Riverrun. She was of the Faith, like her father and grandfather and his father before him. Her gods had names, and their faces were as familiar as the faces of her parents. Worship was a septon with a censer, the smell of incense, a seven-sided crystal alive with light, voices raised in song. The Tullys kept a godswood, as all the great houses did, but it was only a place to walk or read or lie in the sun. Worship was for the sept.
凯特琳身受七种圣油祝福与加持，连命名仪式也是在浸沐于七彩虹光的奔流城圣堂里举行的。她和父祖数代一样信仰七神（注解１），她信奉的神有名有姓，脸庞也如同自己双亲般熟悉。她在香炉冉冉的圣堂里祷告，燃香气味飘漫，有着光芒共生的七面水晶，和喃喃的人声吟唱。徒利家族虽然像其他大家贵族般拥有自己的神木林，但只不过是个散步阅读或在暖阳下休憩的处所，敬拜神明向来是圣堂里的事。
For her sake, Ned had built a small sept where she might sing to the seven faces of god, but the blood of the First Men still flowed in the veins of the Starks, and his own gods were the old ones, the nameless, faceless gods of the greenwood they shared with the vanished children of the forest.
奈德（注解２）为她建了座小圣堂，好让她有个向七神诵唱的地方。然而史塔克家族体内依旧流淌着“先民”的血液，他信奉没有名号也没有容貌的远古诸神，那些属于苍翠树林，曾经与消失的森林之子共同信仰的神。
At the center of the grove an ancient weirwood brooded over a small pool where the waters were black and cold. "The heart tree," Ned called it. The weirwood’s bark was white as bone, its leaves dark red, like a thousand bloodstained hands. A face had been carved in the trunk of the great tree, its features long and melancholy, the deep-cut eyes red with dried sap and strangely watchful. They were old, those eyes; older than Winterfell itself. They had seen Brandon the Builder set the first stone, if the tales were true; they had watched the castle’s granite walls rise around them. It was said that the children of the forest had carved the faces in the trees during the dawn centuries before the coming of the First Men across the narrow sea.
林子中央有棵古老的鱼梁木，笼罩着一泓黑冷池水，奈德称之为“城心树”。鱼梁木的树皮灰白如骨，叶色深红，有如千只染血手掌。树干上刻了一张人脸，容貌深长而忧郁，满是干涸红色树汁的深陷眼凹怪异地充满警戒意味。那是一双古老的眼睛，比临冬城还要古老，它们曾经目睹“筑城者”布兰登安下第一块基石，倘若传说属实，它们也见证了城堡的大理石墙在四周逐渐高筑。传说这些脸是森林之子在“先民”渡过狭海而来之前刻上去的。
In the south the last weirwoods had been cut down or burned out a thousand years ago, except on the Isle of Faces where the green men kept their silent watch. Up here it was different. Here every castle had its godswood, and every godswood had its heart tree, and every heart tree its face.
南方的鱼梁木早在千年前便遭砍伐焚烧殆尽，只有千面屿上还有绿人静静地看守。然而在北境一切都回然不同，这里每一座城堡都有自己的神木林，每座神木林都有一棵城心树，每棵城心树都有一张人脸。
Catelyn found her husband beneath the weirwood, seated on a moss-covered stone. The greatsword Ice was across his lap, and he was cleaning the blade in those waters black as night. A thousand years of humus lay thick upon the godswood floor, swallowing the sound of her feet, but the red eyes of the weirwood seemed to follow her as she came. "Ned," she called softly.
凯特琳在鱼梁木下找到了她的丈夫，他正静坐在苔藓爬盖的磐石上。宝剑“寒冰”斜躺于膝，而他正用那漆黑如永夜的池水清洗剑上的血污。千年累积的腐植臼厚厚地覆盖在神树林的土地上，吸走了她的足音，但鱼梁木的那双红眼却彷佛紧跟着她不放。“奈德。”她轻声唤道。
He lifted his head to look at her. "Catelyn," he said. His voice was distant and formal. "Where are the children?"
他抬起头望着她。“凯特琳，”他的语调遥远而庄重。“孩子们呢？”
He would always ask her that. "In the kitchen, arguing about names for the wolf pups." She spread her cloak on the forest floor and sat beside the pool, her back to the weirwood. She could feel the eyes watching her, but she did her best to ignore them. "Arya is already in love, and Sansa is charmed and gracious, but Rickon is not quite sure."
他总是会问起这句。“在厨房里为了要帮小狼们取些什么名字而正在吵架呢！”她把披风铺在林地上，然后在池边坐下，背靠着鱼梁木。她感觉得到那双眼睛盯着自己看，但她竭尽所能想忽略它。“艾莉亚已经爱得发狂了，珊莎也很喜欢，瑞肯则还不太确定。”
"Is he afraid?" Ned asked.
“他害怕么？”奈德问道。
"A little," she admitted. "He is only three."
“有一点，”她承认道，“毕竟他才三岁。”
Ned frowned. "He must learn to face his fears. He will not be three forever. And winter is coming."
奈德皱眉，“他得学着面对自己的恐惧，他不可能永远都是三岁，更何况凛冬将至。”
"Yes," Catelyn agreed. The words gave her a chill, as they always did. The Stark words. Every noble house had its words. Family mottoes, touchstones, prayers of sorts, they boasted of honor and glory, promised loyalty and truth, swore faith and courage. All but the Starks. Winter is coming, said the Stark words. Not for the first time, she reflected on what a strange people these northerners were.
“是啊，”凯特琳也同意，最后那句话一如往常地教她不寒而栗。那是史塔克家族的警语，每一个贵族家族都有自己的箴言警句：或是世代相传的座右铭，或是待人处事的衡量辬准，或是面临困境的祷词；有的夸耀荣誉，有些讲究忠贞诚信，还有的为信仰勇气宣誓，唯独史塔克家族例外。凛冬将至，史塔克家族的警语是这么说的。她已经不只一次在心里暗自疑惑，这些北方人究竟是什么样的一群怪人。
"The man died well, I’ll give him that," Ned said. He had a swatch of oiled leather in one hand. He ran it lightly up the greatsword as he spoke, polishing the metal to a dark glow. "I was glad for Bran’s sake. You would have been proud of Bran."
“今天那个人死得很干脆，这一点我不否认。”奈德说道，他手里握了一块上了油的皮革，边说边轻拭剑身，把金属磨出一道暗沉的光泽。“我很为布兰高兴，你要是在场，也会为他骄傲的。”
"I am always proud of Bran," Catelyn replied, watching the sword as he stroked it. She could see the rippling deep within the steel, where the metal had been folded back on itself a hundred times in the forging. Catelyn had no love for swords, but she could not deny that Ice had its own beauty. It had been forged in Valyria, before the Doom had come to the old Freehold, when the ironsmiths had worked their metal with spells as well as hammers. Four hundred years old it was, and as sharp as the day it was forged. The name it bore was older still, a legacy from the age of heroes, when the Starks were Kings in the North.
“我向来都很为他骄傲。”凯特琳看着他拭剑答道，她可以看见钢铁深处的波纹，那是锻臸时千锤百链的印记。凯特琳对刀剑素无好感，但她不能否认“寒冰”确实有其独特的美。它是在末日浩劫降临古自由堡垒以前，在瓦雷利亚锻造而成的，当时的铁匠不仅用凿槌冶铁，也用法术来形塑金属。宝剑已有四百年历史，却仍旧如同它锻冶初成时那般锋利，它的名字则更是源远流长，是古代英雄纪元时的精神遗产，那时史塔克一族是北境之王。
"He was the fourth this year," Ned said grimly. "The poor man was half-mad. Something had put a fear in him so deep that my words could not reach him." He sighed. "Ben writes that the strength of the Night’s Watch is down below a thousand. It’s not only desertions. They are losing men on rangings as well."
“这已经是今年第四个逃兵了，”奈德沉着脸说道，“那个可怜的家伙已经疯了一半，不知什么东西把他吓成那副德行，连我说话都起不了作用。”他叹口气，“班扬写信来说守夜人的兵力只剩不到一千，不只是因为逃兵，他们派出去的巡逻队也损失惨重。”
"Is it the wildlings?" she asked.
“是野人的关系么？”她问道。
"Who else?" Ned lifted Ice, looked down the cool steel length of it. "And it will only grow worse. The day may come when I will have no choice but to call the banners and ride north to deal with this King-beyond-the-Wall for good and all."
“还会有谁呢？”奈德举起“寒冰”，俯首审视手中冰冷的钢铁。“而且恐怕情况只会越来越糟，也许我更会别无选择，非得召集家臣，率军北进，与这个绝境长城以外的国王一决生死。”
"Beyond the Wall?" The thought made Catelyn shudder.
“绝境长城以外？”凯特琳想到就不禁浑身颤抖。
Ned saw the dread on her face. "Mance Rayder is nothing for us to fear."
奈德察觉了她脸上的恐惧。“我们用不着害怕曼斯•雷德。”
"There are darker things beyond the Wall." She glanced behind her at the heart tree, the pale bark and red eyes, watching, listening, thinking its long slow thoughts.
“长城外还有更可怕的东西。”她转过头去，看着城心树惨白的树皮和赭红的双眼，凝视、倾听、思考着深邃悠远的思绪。
His smile was gentle. "You listen to too many of Old Nan’s stories. The Others are as dead as the children of the forest, gone eight thousand years. Maester Luwin will tell you they never lived at all. No living man has ever seen one."
他的微笑好温柔。“你听了太多老奶妈的故事了。异鬼和森林之子一样，早已经消失了八千多年。鲁温师傅会告诉你他们根本就没存在过，没有人活着见过他们。”
"Until this morning, no living man had ever seen a direwolf either," Catelyn reminded him.
“在今天早上以前，不也没有人见过冰原狼么？”凯特琳提醒他。
"I ought to know better than to argue with a Tully," he said with a rueful smile. He slid Ice back into its sheath. "You did not come here to tell me crib tales. I know how little you like this place. What is it, my lady?"
“我怎么样也说不过徒利家族的人，”他嘴角浮起一抹后悔的微笑，将“寒冰”收回剑鞘。 “我猜你不是跑来跟我讲睡前故事的，更何况我知道你一点也不喜欢这个地方。 究竟是什么事，我的好夫人？”
Catelyn took her husband’s hand. "There was grievous news today, my lord. I did not wish to trouble you until you had cleansed yourself." There was no way to soften the blow, so she told him straight. "I am so sorry, my love. Jon Arryn is dead."
凯特琳握住丈夫的手。“今天我们接获了悲伤的消息，夫君，我不想在你清理宝剑之前打扰你。”既然没有办法减轻伤害，她决定实话实说。“亲爱的，我很难过，琼恩•艾林过世了。”
His eyes found hers, and she could see how hard it took him, as she had known it would. In his youth, Ned had fostered at the Eyrie, and the childless Lord Arryn had become a second father to him and his fellow ward, Robert Baratheon. When the Mad King Aerys II Targaryen had demanded their heads, the Lord of the Eyrie had raised his moon-and-falcon banners in revolt rather than give up those he had pledged to protect.
他们视线相对，她可以清楚地看见他受的打击有多大，正如她所预料。奈德年轻时曾在鹰巢城做过养子，而膝下无子的艾林公爵待他和另一名养子劳勃•拜拉席恩有如生父再世。当疯王伊里斯•坦格利安二世要求他交出两人的项上人头时，这位鹰巢城主揭起他的新月猎鹰旗，宁可兴兵革命也不愿交出他誓言守护的人。
And one day fifteen years ago, this second father had become a brother as well, as he and Ned stood together in the sept at Riverrun to wed two sisters, the daughters of Lord Hoster Tully.
而就在十五年前的那一天，这位再世生父又成了奈德的运襟。他们并肩站在奔流城的圣殿里，娶了一对姊妹，也就是霍斯特•徒利公爵的两个女儿。
"Jon?.?.?.?" he said. "Is this news certain?"
“琼恩……”他说道，“这消息确定了么？”
"It was the king’s seal, and the letter is in Robert’s own hand. I saved it for you. He said Lord Arryn was taken quickly. Even Maester Pycelle was helpless, but he brought the milk of the poppy, so Jon did not linger long in pain."
“信上是国王的印鉴，而且是劳勃亲自手书的。他说艾林公爵走得很仓促，就连派席尔国师也束手无策。不过国师给他喝了罂粟花奶，所以琼恩并没有受太多折磨。”
"That is some small mercy, I suppose," he said. She could see the grief on his face, but even then he thought first of her. "Your sister," he said. "And Jon’s boy. What word of them?"
“我想这也算是最后的一点慈悲了。”他说道，她看见了他脸上的悲伤，但他先想到的还是她。“你妹妹，”他问道，“还有琼恩的儿子，有他们的消息么？”
"The message said only that they were well, and had returned to the Eyrie," Catelyn said. "I wish they had gone to Riverrun instead. The Eyrie is high and lonely, and it was ever her husband’s place, not hers. Lord Jon’s memory will haunt each stone. I know my sister. She needs the comfort of family and friends around her."
“信上只说他们安然无恙，而且已经返回鹰巢城了。”凯特琳说道，“我真希望他们回的是奔流城。鹰巢城高耸孤绝，而且一直都是她丈夫的地盘，而非她的归宿。琼恩大人的回忆肯定会萦绕鹰巢城里的每一块砖石。我很了解妹妹，她需要的是家人和朋友的支持和陪伴。”
"Your uncle waits in the Vale, does he not? Jon named him Knight of the Gate, I’d heard."
“你的叔叔不是正在艾林谷等着她么？我听说琼恩任命他做了血门骑士。”
Catelyn nodded. "Brynden will do what he can for her, and for the boy. That is some comfort, but still?.?.?.?"
凯特琳点点头，“布林登当然会尽他所能照顾她和她儿子，可是……”
"Go to her," Ned urged. "Take the children. Fill her halls with noise and shouts and laughter. That boy of hers needs other children about him, and Lysa should not be alone in her grief."
“那么你去陪她罢，”奈德劝促道，“把孩子也一起带去，让她的居所充满欢笑和喧闹。那孩子需要其他同侪的陪伴，你妹妹更不应独自哀悼。”
"Would that I could," Catelyn said. "The letter had other tidings. The king is riding to Winterfell to seek you out."
“如果我能去就好了。”凯特琳说道，“信上还说到别的事，国王正在往临冬城的路上，他要找你共商国事。”
It took Ned a moment to comprehend her words, but when the understanding came, the darkness left his eyes. "Robert is coming here?" When she nodded, a smile broke across his face.
奈德好一会才理解她话中的意思，但是当他恍然大悟时，眼中阴霾顿时一扫而空。“劳勃要来？”她点点头，他脸上随即绽开一抹微笑。
Catelyn wished she could share his joy. But she had heard the talk in the yards; a direwolf dead in the snow, a broken antler in its throat. Dread coiled within her like a snake, but she forced herself to smile at this man she loved, this man who put no faith in signs. "I knew that would please you," she said. "We should send word to your brother on the Wall."
凯特琳真希望自己能分享他的喜悦，但是她在庭院里听到了传闻，有只冰原狼死在雪地里，喉咙里有根断裂的鹿角。恐惧如同毒蛇般在她心里蜷曲，但她迫使自己在这个她深爱的男人面前强颜欢笑，这个不相信任何预兆的男人。“我就知道你听了会高兴，” 她说道：“我们应该通知你在长城的弟弟。”
"Yes, of course," he agreed. "Ben will want to be here. I shall tell Maester Luwin to send his swiftest bird." Ned rose and pulled her to her feet. "Damnation, how many years has it been? And he gives us no more notice than this? How many in his party, did the message say?"
“对，当然要，”他同意，“班一定会想来。我请鲁温师傅派他飞最快的鸟儿送信去。”奈德直起身，也拉她起来。“该死，我们有多少年没见面了？他居然没有另外通知我。信上有没有写一共会有多少人来？”
"I should think a hundred knights, at the least, with all their retainers, and half again as many freeriders. Cersei and the children travel with them."
“我想至少有一百位骑士吧，加上他们的随从，还有一倍半人数的流浪武土。瑟曦和她的孩子们也都来了。”
"Robert will keep an easy pace for their sakes," he said. "It is just as well. That will give us more time to prepare."
“那么为了他们着想，劳勃不会走太快的。”他说，“也好，这样一来我们才有多点时间准备。”
"The queen’s brothers are also in the party," she told him.
“皇后的哥哥也在队伍里。”她告诉他。
Ned grimaced at that. There was small love between him and the queen’s family, Catelyn knew. The Lannisters of Casterly Rock had come late to Robert’s cause, when victory was all but certain, and he had never forgiven them. "Well, if the price for Robert’s company is an infestation of Lannisters, so be it. It sounds as though Robert is bringing half his court."
奈德听后脸色立刻一沉。凯特琳很清楚他和皇后的家族间向来互无好感，凯岩城的兰尼斯特家族当年是最晚加入劳勃势力的贵族，等到胜败情势早已明朗化后才表态，而奈德始终没有原谅他们。“也罢！如果劳勃来访的代价是这些兰尼斯特家族的讨厌鬼，那就认了吧。只是，听起来劳勃好像把他半个宫廷的人都带来了。“
"Where the king goes, the realm follows," she said.
“国王走到哪儿，王国就跟到哪儿嘛！”她答道。
"It will be good to see the children. The youngest was still sucking at the Lannister woman’s teat the last time I saw him. He must be, what, five by now?"
“看看那些孩子倒也不错。上次见面的时候，劳勃最小的儿子还在喝那个兰尼斯特女人的奶水。一转眼都几年了？他现在应该已经……，五岁了吧？”
"Prince Tommen is seven," she told him. "The same age as Bran. Please, Ned, guard your tongue. The Lannister woman is our queen, and her pride is said to grow with every passing year."
“托曼王子七岁了，”她告诉他，“和布兰同年。奈德，请你小心措辞，那兰尼斯特女人好歹是我们的皇后，而且据说她一年比一年更傲慢。”
Ned squeezed her hand. "There must be a feast, of course, with singers, and Robert will want to hunt. I shall send Jory south with an honor guard to meet them on the kingsroad and escort them back. Gods, how are we going to feed them all? On his way already, you said? Damn the man. Damn his royal hide."
奈德捏捏她的手，“我们得办场晚宴，当然还要有乐师和歌手，而且劳勃铁定会到外头打猎。我就派乔里和荣誉护卫南下去国王大道迎接，然后护送他们回来罢。诸神在上，我们要怎么喂饱这些人啊？你说他已经在路上了？这家伙真该死，他这做国王的家伙更是该死。”
